Hello.
Hello.
And.
Hello.
Tell.
Will start with Invocation.
Please keep your right palm or we left palm palm facing
upwards, loosely placed on your lap. Those of you wearing
spectacles, please keep them aside. We will do the invocation
together.
Huskur Tomar
Dharmasoth Somak
Jo tere gamaya.
Mrityu Rama Mrudang Maya
Shanti. Shanti Shanti. He
welcome all of you
to guided Shakti Chalana Kriya session.
So how many of you have done the
Shunya program in past 6 months?
Is your Shakti Chalana Kriya happening regularly?
How about others
isaka happening properly.
So before we start the session we will like to remind you about
few guidelines. So this Shakti
Chalana Kriya is array
opportunity for you to fine tune your practices and get your
practice corrected.
So in order to make the best use of the session,
we request if you can stay for the entire duration which is for
3 hours.
So this session will be guided.
All you need to do is
be alert and simply listen to the instructions with total
involvement.
Every bit of attention that you have, you put it in
when you do the practice.
We want to review all the instructions for you,
so Please ensure you go along with the instructions.
We again stress that it is very important
that you stay alert
throughout the session
and we focused on the Kriya.
Only then you will be able to reap the maximum benefits.
So few things keep in mind.
Please ensure that you do not take the breaks in this 3 hours,
either for the restroom or for the water.
Please do not use the mobile phones in between.
If you have any questions we will look at it later. You can
post it in the chat box after the session is finished.
But during the session please do not post anything in the chat
box
will be showing you the demos and videos of the Shakti Chalana
Kriya so you can be totally focused and get your practices
corrected.
Hope all of you are on an empty stomach condition
and if you need an extra cushion you can take a minute and you
can bring so. We will review the
Vajrasana posture as well.
Anybody needs an extra question or a bed sheet, you can take a
minute and bring it. So right now.
Is audio clear right now?
Is still low.
Can you can some of you respond?
Is audio clear? Okay okay. Thank
you.
So Satguru says
Shakti Chalana Kriya is a fabulous process
but you need to be
attentive
many people. It takes years of practice for you to focus on a
breath for full set, full set of in the full set of cycles.
So many people cant focus their breath on one full inhalation
midway. Your thoughts wander off or you lose track or control.
Sushanta Chanakya is a rare opportunity. This session is a
very rare opportunity for you to find new practices. So right now
we will start by reviewing the
Mudras. We will start with Chin
Mudra. You can please observe.
You can please sit in Urdu
Siddhasana and observe
now how you hold chin. Mudra is
the tips of your thumb and pointing finger are touching
forming a circle.
The other 3 fingers are straight.
All 4 fingers are side by side touching.
There should be no gap here.
The 4 fingers should be together.
Place the hands on the middle of the thighs, palms facing down
when you hold the mudra. Only the mudra should be tight.
The rest of the arms, shoulders and neck are loose and relaxed.
From the tip of the finger to the rest, this mudra should be
tight.
If you extend the tension into the arm, the mudra may turn
negative.
So only the mudra should be tight.
The rest of the arms, shoulders and neck are loose and relaxed.
Elbows should rest close to the body.
How you hold Chinmaya mudra, we will say the demonstration.
Ask for chin mudra.
The tips of your thumb and pointing finger are touching,
forming a circle,
but this time the remaining 3
fingers are not straight.
Please the tips of the other 3
fingers at the base of the
fingers
and then press them into the palm to form a fist.
Keep some pressure on the fingers. This is Chinmaya Mudra.
Place the hands on the middle of the thighs, palms facing down.
Only the Mudra is tight.
The arms, shoulders and neck are loose and relaxed.
The elbows you dressed close to the body
now have you hold adi mudra? The
3rd mudra is
replace your thumb in the center of your palm.
Close the other 4 fingers over it, making a fest.
Keep some pressure on the fingers.
This is Adi Mudra.
Place the hands on the middle of the thighs, palms facing down.
Only the mudra is state.
The arms, shoulders and neck are loose and relaxed.
The elbows should rest close to the body.
Now we will review. Nadi Kriya,
So how you do nada cruise
holding chin Mudra the first
Mudra
after the sound a 3 times.
Switch to Chinmaya mudra
under the sound ooh 3 times.
Switch to Adi Mudra after the sound maa with mouth closed 3
times.
We will do dauti later after reviewing the instructions.
Right now we will do another create together. You can please
sit in Vajrasana.
Do you remember the 4 points for
Vajrasana?
You are big. Toes should be touching, not overlapping.
Chest erect, back straight,
Arms and shoulders loose and relaxed.
4 Finger space at the very tip of your nice. If you are wearing
spectacles,
please keep them aside.
Please close your eyes
mulching mudra the first mudra.
The tips of your thumb and pointing finger are touching,
forming a circle. The other 3
fingers are straight. All 4
fingers are side by side touching.
When you hold the Mudra,
they should be physical. All the
4 fingers should be physically
touching. There should be no gap in between the fingers. Make
sure there is no clothing in between your fingers.
Place the hands on the middle of the thighs, palms facing down.
Only the Mudra is tight.
Arms, shoulders and neck are loose and relaxed elbows close
to the body.
Now open your mouth wide enough and utter the sound are 3 times.
When you utter the sound you notice where the maximum
vibrations and contractions are happening in your body as you
water. We will do it together.
Eyes closed.
Hi.
Ah
um
um.
Switch to Chinmaya mudra.
The tips of your thumb and pointing finger remain as they
are.
Place the tips of the other 3
fingers at the base of the
fingers
and press them into the palm to form a fest.
Keep some pressure on the fingers.
Now you alter the sound. Ooh,
by keeping your lips in a no shape, exhaling fully into it,
we will after this 3 times together, ice closed.
Who?
Cool
who?
Who?
Who?
Oh,
who?
Who?
Who
the world? Adi Mudra. The 3rd
Mudra
place your thumb in the centre of your palm. Close the other 4
fingers over it, making a fist.
Keep some pressure on the fingers.
Place the hands on the middle of the thighs, palms facing down.
Only the Mudra is tight.
Arms, shoulders and neck are loose and relaxed
elbows. Your rest close to the body.
Now you alter the sound ma with your mouth closed.
Now
how you do it is lets say you utter the sound MAA with your
mouth open.
We will do this together. Just do it together along with me.
What does it become
when you utter the sound uma along with with mouth open? What
does it become? It becomes
Ohh now you after the sound ma with your mouth closed how you
are. There is
no
after the sound 3 times exhaling fully into it. We will do this
together. Whole are the Mudra.
Keep your eyes closed.
Notice where the maximum vibrations are happening in your
body as you alter
NM.
UMM.
Slowly open your eyes.
Please come out of Vajrasana properly.
Slowly come up on your face.
Stay in this position for 20
seconds.
Sit back down again in Vajrasana for 10 seconds.
Again come up for another 20
seconds.
Sit back down again for 10
seconds.
Now shift your body to whichever side is comfortable for you
remains, sitting like this for a minute or 2
before unfolding the legs or getting up.
Now you can please set comfortably.
Now where did you notice the maximum vibrations for chin
mudra? Were you able to notice the vibrations for Chin Mudra,
Chinmay mudra and Adi Mudra?
Sachin mudra? It is in
stomach region. For Chinmaya
Mudra
it is in chest region.
Par Adi Mudra
it is in
throat region.
So when you utter the sound are holding chin mudra and when you
utter the sound ooh holding chinmay mudra utter the sound
who ma with mouth closed holding adi mudra you can notice the
vibrations in the stomach region, chest region and in the
throat region accordingly.
Now this is not about the knowledge. It is not like
yes, yes I know
if I say I will notice a vibrations in the naval region,
It is not. So it doesn't work like that.
So each and every time you utter the sound,
you completely be with the vibrations that are created by
Naadapriya.
Only if you internalise the
Kriya this way
you will be able to reap the benefits beyond physical.
Next is Dawki how to do Dauti.
We will say the demonstration
Please observe. You can sit in
Arden Siddhasana and observe.
How to do doubt is
you hold chin mudra in your hands
with the tip of your tongue. You touch your lower teeth make the
sound show.
Making the sound, you expel the air. Forcefully
expelling the air bending forward, you tuck your head in
so that your eyebrows touch your knees and the top of the head
touches the flow. Stay there for
3 to 4 seconds in total
emptiness only for 3 to 4
seconds and as you inhale you
come up.
We will do this together. We can please sit in Vajrasana.
Check the 4 points,
big ***** touching,
not overlapping.
Chest erect, back straight.
Arms and shoulders loose and relaxed for finger space at the
tip of your niece.
Spectacles aside, eyes closed,
hold chin mudra in your hands.
Make the sound and go down.
By the time you reach your knees, you must be completely
empty of the breath.
Take your head in,
stay there for 3 to 4 seconds
and as you inhale, you come up.
Please rest
you can come out of Vajrasana properly on your own.
Please sit comfortably
and open your eyes.
Please observe
now your physical posture does not allow you to go that far.
You go as far as you can go, but do not raise your body from
Vajrasana posture.
Do not raise your hips from the heels
remaining in Marathi,
remaining in Vajrasana. You go as far as you can go,
so you do not raise your hips like this.
You go as far as you can go, then take your head in,
stay there for 3 to 4 seconds.
As you inhale, you come up.
Now we will look at a few common corrections for Dauti as well as
Madras.
So when you hold when you are doing dauti, many of you have
the tendency not to hold chin mudra in the hands. So make sure
you hold chin mudra as you dauti. For some of you, the
sound is not coming properly.
It is she
not sure.
Now we will look at a few common corrections along with the
demonstration. Please upset
some of you
our first making the sound
and then bending forward.
You make the sound as you bend forward.
Before coming down,
some of you are taking your neck back and using it like a whip.
Please do not do that. Keep the neck straight.
Do not place your forehead on the ground
Tokyo Hidden, so that your eyebrows touch your knees and
top of the head touches the flow. Stay here for 3 to 4
seconds and come up.
Some of you are staying down for longer than 3 to 4 seconds,
or not staying down at all.
Make sure you stay there for 3
to 4 seconds in total emptiness,
and as you inhale, you come up.
As we mentioned earlier,
if your physical stature does not allow you to go that far,
you go as far as you can go without coming out of Vajrasana.
Stay there for 3 to 4 seconds and as you inhale, you come up.
Now we will also look at a few common corrections for all the
mudras. Please upset
in chin mudra. For some people
the tips of the thumb and pointing finger are touching
like this
or like this
or like this.
Make sure
it's a very tips of your fingers that attaching.
Do not keep the fingers apart.
The 4 fingers should be together.
Do not press down on the mudra.
The thumb and the pointing finger should be touching,
forming a circle.
While holding Chinmaya Mudra,
some of you are following the fingers without tucking them in.
Place the tips of the 3 fingers at the base of the fingers
and then press them into the palm to form a fist
in Adi Mudra.
Ensure the knuckles are not sticking out.
Place your thumb in the centre of your palm,
Farmer Udana Mudra.
Some of you are following the fingers holding the 4 fingers
without taking them in.
Place the tips of the 4 fingers at the base of the fingers
and then press them into the pump to form a fist.
Ensure the thumbs are not dropping like this.
Keep your thumbs pointing straight up, perpendicular to
the ground.
Also, there is a tendency to tilt your hands.
Again, the thumb points straight up perpendicular to the ground
for all the mudras. Ensure you do not place your hands to the
front,
back,
outside,
inside,
twisted
or unaligned.
Place the hands on the middle of the thighs so that the elbows
are naturally close to the body.
Do not keep the elbows away from the body.
Your elbows should be close to the body.
Do not keep the palms raised.
Your palms should be on your thighs.
So the next time when you do the
Kriya you can incorporate all
these corrections in Mudra
Kriya. Sorry in
Nadaka.
Now the next Mudra we are going to do is called Mudra Kriya.
In this Kriya you will breathe remembering
4 points to breathing.
Do you remember the 4 points to breathing?
The 4 points to breathing are
breathe fully,
Polly in fully out.
Breathe slowly, slowly in, slowly out.
There should be no jerks. Jerks means you do not do it like
this.
It should be one smooth inhalation and exhalation.
Now 4 to 52 ratio. You can estimate it like this,
Sorry. The 4th point of breathing is when you exhale
there should be sound from the pit of the throat. So what are
the 4 points? Breathe fully,
Fully in, fully out.
Bridge slowly, slowly and slowly out.
There should be no jerks.
It should be one smooth inhalation and exhalation,
and when you exhale there should be a sound from the pit of the
throat. These are the 4 points to breathing
and 4 to 52 ratio. You can estimate it like this.
You inhale fully and slowly.
It is different for different people.
Let's say you take this much time for the inhalation.
Whatever the time you took for inhalation, that is 4
when you hold the fullness, you hold it for approximately half
the time you took for inhalation, which is 2.
When you exhale, you ensure your exhalation is slightly longer
than the inhalation, which is 5.
When you hold the emptiness, once again you hold it as long
as you have the fullness, which is 2, so 4252.
This 4252 is not in terms of numbers, counts, calculation or
seconds. This is a certain approximation.
Now what is the first point to breathing when you do Mudra
Kriya?
The first point to breathing is to inhale fully. When can you
inhale fully?
If you are empty inside So always ensure you start Mudra
Kriya with an acceleration.
So we will be doing Mudra Kriya holding 4 mudra for mudras that
is chin Mudra
chinmaya mudra
adi mudra
merudand samudra.
So here we will be keeping the time for each of the mudras. Do
it till I ask you to switch. So you inhale fully, slowly.
Hold your breath for approximately half the time you
took for inhalation.
Exhale fully, slowly, slightly longer than the inhalation,
making the sound from the pit of the throat.
Hold the emptiness as long as you have the fullness. This is
one cycle. When I ask you to switch, you complete the cycle
and then switch to the next mudra. If you breathe once,
remembering 4 points to breathing and 4 to 5 to ratio,
that is one cycle.
Now we will start with Chin mudra.
First Mudra
sit in vajrasana. Check the 4
points.
Big ***** touching, not overlapping,
just erect backstreet
arms and shoulders loose and relaxed.
4 Finger space at the tip of your niece.
Keep your eyes closed,
Chin Mudra.
Be totally focused upon the breath.
Breathe fully
slowly.
Remember the ratio
4,
2,
5,
2.
Notice where the maximum expansions and contractions are
in the body as you breathe.
Switch to Chinmaya Mudra.
Only the Mudra is diet.
The arms, shoulders and neck are loose and relaxed.
Focus on the breath.
Complete the cycle
and stop.
Please open your eyes.
So are you able to notice the maximum expansions and
contractions for Chin Mudra
and Chinmaya Mudra,
Fortune mudra? Where is it?
So when you hold Chin Mudra,
you can notice the maximum expansions and contractions
around the naval region.
That is,
the lower lobe of the lungs are activated and the prana is
directed to the lower portion of the body For Chin Mudra. Were
you able to notice
when you hold Chinmaya mudra?
You are able to notice. So when
you hold Chinmaya mudra,
the middle lobe of the lungs are activated. That is the prana is
directed to the middle portion of the body that is in between
the pit of the throat. And they will
now
say this session
Dushchakra guided session
is offered only because
is offered in a trust your that you are able to that you are
making the best use of it.
So now that it's not, it's a online session, it's a webinar,
we are not not able to see you.
So hope all of you are making
the sanctity of the session.
It's very important that whatever the instructions are
there, you follow it. Especially the guidelines
that most importantly that you are focused
not taking the breaks in between that your focused upon the
Courier.
Only then
you will be able to make use of the session.
Only then you will be able to reap the benefits out of the
session.
Otherwise you might be wasting your time and our time as well.
So hope all of you are following the instructions and staying
focused on the Crea
and you are staying focused on the breath. Only then Mudra
Kriya will happen,
so the mind and breadth should fuse.
Otherwise, there is no clear
you are sitting here. There is no Priya.
Just by breathing the Kriya will not happen. You need to
understand
this is not a breathing exercise.
This is not a breathing technique.
Shakti Chalana Kriya is about the inner energies.
It is not about the breath.
We are only using the path as a means.
So only if you are totally focused upon the breath, the
kriya will happen.
Now
you hold Adi Mudra
and do the same breathing
remembering 4 points to breathing 4 to 52 ratio. Focus
on the breath and notice where the maximum expansions and
contractions are happening in the body. Do it till I ask you
to switch to the next mudra.
Please sit in Vajrasana.
Check the 4 points.
Eyes closed,
Adi Mudra
please. Your thumb in the centre of your palm.
Close the other 4 fingers over it, making a fest.
Keep some pressure on the fingers.
Be totally focused upon the breath.
Preet fully
slowly.
Switch to Mera Chanda mudra
pleasure tips of the 4 fingers
at the base of the fingers.
Press them into the palm to form
a fist.
The thumb points straight up, perpendicular to the ground.
Complete the cycle.
Unstop
whole Chin Mudra
do one Dauti unrest.
Please set comfortably
and open your eyes.
Were you able to notice the maximum vibrations and
contractions where the expansions and contractions were
in?
Adi Mudra and Mera danda mudra.
For Adi mudra, where was it?
Sensations will be all over the face, but you can notice the
maximum expansions and contractions in the throat
region. That is,
the upper lobe of the lungs are activated
Farmer, Udana Mudra,
Farmer Danda Mudra. You can notice the maximum expansions
and contractions in all the 3
loop, but only in the back
portion.
First lower back expands,
then the middle back,
then the back of the ribs expand
and then the upper back.
This Mudra variation is very beneficial for the back
problems.
Anyone suffering from back problems can do
Mudra Kriya holding Meragana
Mudra more than the others.
Now the next kriya we are going to do is called Sukriya.
When you do Sukriya,
there is no ratio,
no sound,
no Kumbhaka, no Shunya Ka.
You simply breathe slowly and gently.
You should not make any sound when you exhale or inhale.
The breath should be as slow and gentle as it is possible for
you.
Just relax and let the breath settle down by itself.
Now before we start Shukriya, we will look at a few common
corrections. We can please it in
Arden Siddhasana and observe.
Ensure that you do not keep your head down.
Your head should be straight.
Do not keep your head tilted to one side
or the other.
Your head should be straight.
Do not keep the fingers
apart.
Do not keep your fingers apart.
Your 4 fingers should be together, pointing straight up.
There is a tendency to rest your fingers on the forehead.
Keep your fingers
away from the forehead.
Do not keep your shoulder raised or tensed.
Keep your shoulder relaxed.
Do not keep your elbow away from the body.
Your elbow should be close to the body.
Now we will do Sukriya together.
Anyone with the blocked
nostrils. Just check if there is anybody with a blocked nostrils.
If you have the block nostrils, please come out of Vajrasana
properly.
Stand up job on the spot briskly for a minute or 2
if there are people who cannot joke. You can make 2 fist in
your hands. Raise your hands above and swing them down
vigorously with the throat with the sound from the pit of the
throat. You can do this for 25
to 30 times. You can please do
the jogging or the variation.
Okay those of you are not doing jogging or variation. We will
start with Sukriya. You can please it in Vajrasana.
Check the 4 points so we will do sukriya for 3 to 4 minutes. I
will keep the time for you. Do it till I ask you to stop.
Please close your eyes and do
Sukriya.
Those of you read the jogging, just wait for a minute. Allow
your breath to settle down before starting Sukriya
Dose of you. Did the jogging
continue Sukriya for 2 minutes?
Others complete the cycle and stop.
Check if the breath is balanced.
If it is not balanced, Continue
for 2 more minutes. If it is balanced,
please come out of Vajrasana properly.
Do still doing Sukriya.
Please complete the cycle and stop.
Please set comfortably and open your eyes.
The next Shakti Chalana Kriya we are going to do is called
Mahant Prakriya.
We will be doing Mahati Prakriya in a certain mudra called Poorna
Mudra.
How to hold purna mudra? He will demonstrate. Please upset
how to hold poorna Mudra is make
2 fists with thumbs inside.
Make them touch at the point
where your rings would be on your ring fingers if you are
wearing them.
This contact should be maintained throughout the
Courier.
Maintaining this contact with the palms facing up,
place the fists on the thighs
so that it is in contact with the lower abdomen. Press down on
the wrists, raise the shoulders, pull the chest in and straighten
the arms as much as you can.
The result is arms are completely straight,
elbows are locked and there is no gap between the arms and the
body.
Only the Mudra is tight.
The rest of the body should be loose and relaxed.
This is
Poorna Mudra.
Now we will look at a few common corrections for poorna mudra,
along with the demonstration.
Please observe.
Make sure you do not keep your thumbs outside.
Make 2 fists with thumbs inside.
Do not keep the fists like this
with only the upper part of the fingers touching
or only the knuckles touching.
Make them touch at the point where your rings would be on
your ring fingers if you were wearing them. This contact
should be maintained throughout the Courier.
Do not keep your fists
facing downwards
or towards the stomach
with the palms facing up.
Place a fish on your thighs so that it is in contact with your
lower abdomen.
Do not keep the Mudra. Lose
or
push the chest out.
Press down on the hands,
raise your shoulders, Pull the chest in straight in the arms as
much as you can.
Do not lean into the Mudra.
There is a tendency to move forward.
Keep the arm straight.
Switch the spine as much as you can
to straighten the hands.
To straighten the arms.
Do not bring the hands to the front like this.
The abdomen contact has to be maintained,
so maintaining that contact to whatever extent it is possible
for you to tighten the hunts.
You do that much
in order to get further into the
Mudra,
do not allow the needs to come apart.
There should be a 4 finger space at the tips of your niece
throughout the Korea.
Now Shakti Chalana Kriya is a very powerful kriya. There are
certain people who should not attempt this. So we will go over
the conditions like that, conditions like this, the people
who should not attempt. If you have any conditions like that
you please do not attempt made prakriya. There is an
alternative will let you know.
So if there are people who have hernia in the abdomen region,
people who have any kind of heart ailment or cardiac
condition,
People who have gone through a major surgery in the last 6
months
or those of you who are planning to undergo 1:00 in the next 3
months.
Anyone with any kind of
hemorrhage of the brain or been operated upon the brain.
Ladies, during any stage of pregnancy or periods
right now, if you are having periods, you can do it for the
case of learning, but as a practice, don't do it when you
have periods. So this such people should not attempt to
mark prakriya. Others can do it.
So now he will demonstrate one full cycle of math prakriya. You
can please it in another sudarsana and observe.
Now we will learn this kriya in
2 steps.
First we will learn
Kapalabhati. That is the first step. That is the sound he made.
Now this also we will learn in 3
steps.
So except the people who have the conditions, others what you
do is
sitting in Poorna mudra,
sitting in Vajrasana, holding
Purna mudra.
You pretend you have a burning candle a few feet in front of
you and you want to blow it out.
How will you blow?
If you blow like this,
do you think you can plot the candle
to blow it out? You have to blow all the air out in one forceful
blow.
Will see the demonstration.
You do not blow like this.
You have to blow all the air out in one quick short forceful
blow.
So when I count one,
I want all of you to do like this once. All of you should do
it together. It should come like an orchestra. OK, so only when I
count one, you blow all the air out in one quick short for
school. Blow as forcefully as you can. Ready
can please sit in vajrasana.
Those who should not attempt
math prakriya, please do not attempt it. Those who can do
math prakriya, you can please sit in vajrasana.
Hold Purna mudra,
make 2 fists with thumbs inside.
Make them touch at the point where your rings would be on
your ring fingers if you are wearing them.
This contact should be maintained throughout the
Courier.
Maintaining this contact with the palms facing up,
place a fists on the thighs so that it is in contact with the
lower abdomen.
Press down on the wrists, raise the shoulders, Pull the chest in
and straight in the arms as much as you can.
Keep your Poonam Mudra fully diet.
Your spectacles should be off.
Eyes closed.
Now when I count one, you blow all the air out in one forceful
blow. Ready.
Eyes Closed
Please open your eyes.
You can please rest.
You can sit comfortably and open your eyes,
so the purpose of this was to teach you to blow all the air
out using your diaphragm like a pump.
So everything you have should go out in a one single blow
in one single blue, using your diaphragm like a pump.
Everything that you have should go out.
Now the next step you are going to do the same thing,
blowing all the air out
using your diaphragm like a pump.
Except this time,
keep your mouth open a little more and you make the sound by
constructing the pit of the throat like this.
I want you to to do like this once when I say one,
OK when I say one. All of you keep your mouth a little open
and make the sound when you blow out by considering the throat
Vajrasana.
Keep your Poonam Mudra fully diet.
Eyes closed.
Keep your eyes closed.
Ready
Please open your eyes
So still some of you may not be able to make the sound properly.
So we will see the demonstration once again. Just observe.
It is the same sound that you are making in the other crias,
the same one with a blow.
We will do this together once again,
Vajrasana.
Eyes closed.
Keep your poonam Mudra fully tight
ready so when I count one you blow all the air out using your
dragon like a pump. Keep your mouth a little open and make the
sound when you blow out the air by constructing the throat.
Ready
please stop.
Please open your eyes.
Now the next step, you are going to do the same thing
again, blowing out the air using your diaphragm like a pump,
except this time after blowing out 3 times,
the 4th time simply close your mouth and continue doing it
without losing the construction.
That means you will do the same
way, only close your market.
So when I count 123, you do it with your mouth open. When
account one one
simply close your mouth and continue doing it. So do it only
when I say one.
You do not do it fast now you do it slow. Do it only when account
one
eyes closed.
Vajrasana
Poonam Mudra fully tight
ready
Please stop.
You can rest.
Please set comfortably and open your eyes.
So the last thing you just did was kapalabhati.
Now we will learn the next part of math prakriya that is the
pandas. He will once again demonstrate one full cycle of
math Prakriya. You can play
Subsidy
Can you just
you can just go to the.
So what's being done is
sitting in Vajrasana
holding Purna mudra. You do 15
to 20 kapalabhati.
There must be a space of second and half gap between each
kapalabhati. If you do it very fast
you will not be able to continue
because it takes second half for the air to get back into the
lungs
initially. If you are not able to make the sound,
you first open your mouth,
make the sound,
close your mouth and continue doing it.
Now if you
empty it,
as I said, there should be a space of second half between one
kapalbhati and the other.
So if you empty it, it will get back. But you should you should
not notice an inhalation
when you do kapalbhati. You should not do it like this. That
is,
this is not kapalabhati. You do it in such a way as if there is
no inhalation. There is an inhalation. You create a, you
create a vacuum and it just sucks back into you immediately.
But you should not notice an inhalation
after the last kapalabhati.
Do not allow the air to get back into immediately.
Hold Sonika or emptiness for a couple of seconds.
Make use of these 2 seconds to completely tighten the arms,
then inhale fully.
Take your head back, Sachin, bring it down.
There are 3 moments in this, but it should happen in one fluid
motion. This is known as the
Jalandhara bandha or the neck
lock. Once you engage the next clock, you will notice a little
bit of toughness in the muscles.
Where the rib cage ends and the
diaphragm begins. There is a soft spot which will become
taught once you notice it. It is a diaphragm lock. It is a
diaphragm lock or the udayana
Banda. Once you notice the
diaphragm lock, you consciously construct and pull your ****
muscles up
and hold it.
So once you engage in a clock, the diaphragm lock and the inner
lock, the diaphragm lock will happen by itself. Once you
notice the diaphragm lock, you consciously engage the analogue
with these 3 locks. Stay here on fullness of the breath as long
as it is comfortable for you.
When you feel like exhaling,
bring your head up.
Excel through nozzles, making the sound from the pit of the
throat. After the exhalation is complete, you relax the poorna
mudra.
After you like the poonam mudra, you relax the inner lock. OK, I
will repeat once again. Please tell it
so. Have you do this is sitting in Vajrasana
holding Purna mudra,
You can do 15 to 20 kapalbhati per cycle.
There must be a second and a half gap between each
Kapalabhati
after the last couple. Ambati,
you do not allow the air to get back into you immediately.
Hold Shunya Ka or emptiness for a couple of seconds. Make use of
this 2 seconds to completely tighten the arms, then inhale
fully.
Take your head back, tuck your chin, bring it down.
Once you engage the network properly, the diaphragm lock
will happen by itself.
Once you notice adapt from lock
you consciously construct an engage the analogue.
So with these 3 locks the next lock diaphragm lock and the
inner lock. With these 3 locks stay here on fullness as long as
it is comfortable for you. When you feel like exhaling, bring
your head up.
Excel through the hostels making the sound from the pit of the
throat.
After the exhalation is complete, you relax the Purna
mudra.
Once you relax Apana mudra, you relax the inner log.
Now we will do one cycle of maduravakya together along with
the instructions those we should not attend Mark prakriya Please
wait. Those who can do math prakriya, you can please sit in
Vajrasana.
Check the 4 points.
Big boss touching, not overlapping.
Chest erect back straight.
Arms and shoulders loose under laxed
4 finger space at the tip of your niece
Poorna mudra.
Make 2 fists with thumbs inside.
Make them touch at the point where your rings would be on
your ring fingers if you are wearing them.
This contact should be maintained throughout the
Courier.
Maintaining this contact with the palms facing up,
place a fish on the thighs so that it is in contact with the
lower abdomen.
Press down on the wrists. Raise the shoulders.
Pull the chest in straight in the arms as much as you can.
Please close your eyes. We will do this together.
You can do 15 to 20 kapalabhati.
There must be a second and a
half gap between each kapalabhati.
The last couple kabaddi
remain in the emptiness for 2
seconds. Tighten the mudra.
Inhale fully.
Take your head back, Sachin.
Bring it down.
Once you notice the diaphragm lock, engage the inner log.
Stay here on fullness as long as it is comfortable for you.
When you feel like exhaling,
bring your head up. Excel through the nostrils making the
sound.
After the exhalation is complete,
relax Aparna Mudra.
Dan, relax the inner lock.
If you are done,
you can please come out of our rasna properly.
Can you please sit comfortably and open your eyes?
Now we will look at a few common corrections for math prakriya.
You can place it in Ardra
Siddhasana and observe
while doing kapalbhati. Do not judge the whole body,
just the diaphragm should move.
For some people the gap between
2 kapalabhati is less. It is
less than a second half. They are doing it very fast.
Dharma just be a space of second and half between one kapalbhati
and the other.
If you do it very fast you will not be able to continue because
it takes second and a half for the air to get back into the
lungs.
So you do the kapalbhati like this.
Some people are blowing from the chest
Arnos.
You should blow all the air out using your diaphragm like a
pump.
There is a tendency to strain the face while doing kapalbhati.
The face should be relaxed throughout.
For some people, the Mudra is becoming loose after some time.
Keep the Madras straight. Keep the arms straight all the time.
Some people are engaging the next lock immediately after last
couple Ambati.
After the last Kapalabhati. Wait about for 2 seconds
and inhale fully. This will waiting. The 2 seconds will help
you in a fuller inhalation.
When releasing the locks, do not relax everything at once.
When you feel like exhaling,
first bring your head up.
Exhale to the nostrils with the sound.
After the exhalation is complete, relax Apana mudra.
Then you relax the in a log. It must happen in this order.
Now incorporating this corrections,
you can do 2 more cycles of math prakriya on your own, one dauti
and rest. If there are people who should not attempt to make
prakriya, you hold poorna mudra,
breathe with 4 to 5 to ratio remembering 4 points to
breathing, 7 cycles, one dauti and rest. You can do 2 cycles on
your own. Keep your eyes closed.
You can complete the cycle.
Please rest.
Please set comfortably and open your eyes.
Now we will look at a few more common corrections along with
the demonstration
can sit in Ardha Sudarsana and observe
while doing the next clock.
Some people are taking your head back and keeping it there for
the long time.
The main aim of doing the next lock is to hold Kumbhaka.
If you keep your head back for a long time,
the time for which you hold
Kumbhaka will be reduced.
So you do the next lock like this.
For some of you, talking in of the chin is not happening
properly.
Take your head back.
With the head still leaning back, pull your chin in tightly.
Once your chin is fully in, bring your head down and
forward, resting on the bit of the throat.
There is a tendency to relax the poorna mudra as you exhale.
Exhale fully first,
then relax the Poonam Mitra.
So the next crias we are going to learn. The next Kriya we are
going to learn is called
Swapnapriya. How to do
Swapnapriya will say that
remonstration please upset.
So what's being done is sitting in Vajrasana,
you place your palms on your waist, loosely placed.
Inhale fully,
open your mouth wide enough and stretch your tongue out fully.
If you stretch the tongue out fully
you will notice attention in the uvula which is a tongue like
thing hanging from the top. You must stretch it to your point
where you notice tension in the uvula. Once you notice attention
you do the dogs breath. If a dog comes running and stands here in
front of you, how it would breathe
just on the surface as rapidly as it is possible. So it is not
like doing kapalbhati
if you not come from the abdomen.
It should be done as rapidly as it is possible, only on the
surface. So if you can't do it that rapidly, you can start
slowly and gradually increase the speed like this.
So you do this 12 to 16 times, close your mouth
in helpfully and engaged the
Bandas Azido in Shambhavi. That
is, take your head back, the kitchen in, bring it down. Pull
the diaphragm muscles in.
Pull the enormous up.
Stay here on fullness as long as it is comfortable for you. When
you feel like exhaling, bring your head up.
Excel to the nostrils, making the sound from the bit of the
throat
after the exhalation is complete again. Take your head back. Take
your chin. Bring it down. Lock it up on the emptiness. Stay
here on emptiness as long as it is comfortable for you. When you
feel like inhaling, bring your head head up.
Inhale through the nostrils.
After the installation is complete, you relax the
date from lock and then you relax the inner lock. Now before
we do Swan Acharya, we will look at a few common corrections
along with the demonstration.
Please observe.
Do not keep your hands
on your hips.
Your hands should be on your waist, loosely placed.
Do not keep your shoulders forward
or backwood.
Your elbows should be in line with your shoulders.
Some of you are stretching the tongue.
Some of your are not stretching the tongue tongue out
or only partially stretching it out.
You must specify a tongue out fully to a point where you
notice tension in the uvula.
Some of you are doing it like
Kapalabhati.
It is not like kapalbhati. It should be done as rapid as it is
possible only on the surface.
There is a tendency to strain the face while doing Swan
Akhiya.
The face should be relaxed throughout the kriya.
Now we will do it together along with the instructions. You can
place it in Vajrasana,
spectacles aside,
ice closed.
We will do it together along with the instructions.
Replace your palms
on your waist,
loosely placed.
Inhale fully.
Stretch your tongue out fully.
Now you do the dogs breath 12 to
16 times.
Close your mouth.
Inhale fully,
engaged the bandas as you do in
Shambhavi.
When you exhale, you make the sound from the pit of the
throat.
When you are done, please come out of Vajrasana properly.
Please sit comfortably and open your eyes.
Next Kriya we are going to do is called Kakariya. How to do?
Kakariya will see the demonstration. Please observe.
So what's being done is
Kakariya is exactly the same process as Swapnapriya. Instead
of the dogs breath you will be doing the birds call.
So sitting in Vajrasana, you place your palms on your waist,
loosely placed.
Inhale fully. Stretch your tongue out fully
using using your diaphragm like a pump. You pump the air out
powerfully and attach the sound car to it.
The birth call should not be uttered with the local chords
because the tongue is stretched out and you are breathing in a
certain way. It will happen by itself.
Do it as forcefully as you can.
Do it 12 to 16 times,
then close your mouth.
Inhale Fully
engage the bandas as you do in
Shambhavi.
When you excel, you make the sound from the bit of the
throat.
Now if there are people who are
above 60 years of age
and those who should not attempt kapalabhati,
you should do it gently. Without pumping The sound is stretched,
not forceful.
So the sound is like this.
Okay. Then close your mouth.
Engage the bandas as you do in
Shambhavi. Shall we do this together along with
instructions? Now before we do it, we will look at a common
correction we can Please observe.
Do not say Kaka,
kaa, kaa, kaa
or try to make any sound.
The bird call should not be uttered with the vocal chords
because the tongue is stretched out. It will happen by itself.
We will do this together along with the instructions. Please
sit in Vajrasana.
Ice closed
your palms on your waist, loosely placed.
Inhale fully.
Switch your tongue out fully
using your diaphragm like a pump. You pump the air out and
attach the sound car to it.
Dokriya 12 to 16 times
close your mouth.
Inhale Fully
engage the bandas as you do in
Shambhavi.
When you exhale, make the sound from the pit of the throat.
When you are done, please rest.
Can you please sit comfortably
and open your eyes?
The next Kriya we are going to do is called Nagriya. How to do
Nagriya will see the demonstration just upset.
So what's being done is
you hold Chhudra in your hands,
you inhale in installments,
inhale a little bit,
hold count one to 9.
You choose a certain place of counting and you stick to that.
For example, you can count it like this, 123456789, not too
fast, not too slow. You choose a comfortable phase and you stick
to that
inhen a little more.
Count one to 9.
Inhale a little more.
Count one to 9
like this. You inhale in 8
installments with the space of
9 counts between each installment.
At the end, for the last installment,
inhale fully,
count one to 9,
then release Chin Mudra in both the hands.
Close the right nostril with the right thumb.
Exhale to the left nostril with the sound from the pit of the
throat.
If you find 8 installments are little difficult for you to
start with, you start with 6
installments.
If you find 6 is also difficult, you start with 4.
Before we do naadapriya, we will once again. We will see a
demonstration. We will see correction along with the
demonstration. Just observe.
So there is a tendency not to release Chin Mudra
in the right hand.
At the end, after the full inhalation,
whole count one to 9, release chin mudra
in both the hands,
then close the right nostril with the right thumb
and exhale to the left nostril with the sound from the pit of
the throat.
I will repeat the instructions for Nagriya once again so you
hold Chin Mudra in both the hands.
Inhale in installments.
Inhaler bit hold count one to 9.
You count at a comfortable pace.
You choose a certain pace and
you stick to that. For example, you can count it like this
123456789. You choose a certain place and you stick to that.
Inhale a little more. Count 129.
Inhale a little more. Count one to 9
like this. You inhale in 8
installments with a space of 9
counts between each installment.
At the end, for the last installment,
inhale fully,
count one to 9,
then release Chin Mudra in both the hands.
Close the right nostril with the right thumb
and exhale through left nostril with the sound from the pit of
the throat.
If 8 installments are little difficult for you to start with,
you start with 6 installments.
If 6 is also difficult, you
start with 4 now
as the correction there is a tendency not to release chin
mudra in the right hand. Ensure you raise the chin mudra in the
right hand before you excel from the left nostril. Now
incorporating this correction you do Nagriya once on your own
one Dauti and rest
sitting Vajrasana eyes closed.
If you are done
please come out of Vajrasana properly.
Hum sorry after Nagariya
you hold chin mudra do one dauti rest and then come out of
Vajrasana properly.
Please open your eyes
now. The next Kriya we are going to do is called
Puncher Sahit Thakuria
Sarpanch. Sahitya means 5
organs,
lungs, liver, stomach,
kidneys and heart. So now we will start with the lungs.
Lungs have 3 loop lower loop.
Middle lobe and upper loop. We first want to activate the lower
lobe of the lungs.
So the count that we use is 416
84, the mudra that uses
chin mudra,
so 41684. This is not a ratio, this is actual counting. You
inhale for the count of 4.
Hold the air inside for the count of 16.
Exhale
with the sound from the pit of the throat for the count of 8.
Then you hold out the breath for the count of 4. We will do 3
cycles. I will keep the counting for you. I will guide the Punchi
Thakeria so you can do it along with the guiding. You focus your
mind on the lower lobe where the rib cage ends and the diaphragm
begins
holding chin Mudra. Focus your mind in the lower lobe and we
will do 3 cycles. Please sit in
Vajrasana,
eyes closed,
old chin Mudra.
Focus your mind on the lower loop,
where the rib cage ends and the diaphragm begins. The count is
41684.
I will keep the counting for you.
Inhale 1234 Hold in
12345678910111213141516 exhale
12345678 Hold out 1234 Inhale
1234 Hold in 123456
78910111213141516 Exile 12345678
Holdout 1234 Inhale
123412345678910111213141516123456
781234 Next is the middle loop.
Hold Chinmaya mudra
Chinmaya mudra Focus your mind on the middle lobe in the chest
region is the same. Count 41684
We will do 3 cycles. 4 is
inhalation, 16 is holding the air in.
8 is exhalation with the sound forays holding out the breath as
closed.
Inhale 1234 Holding
12345678910111213141516 EXILE
12345678 Hold out 1234 Inhale
12341234567891011
well 13141516123456781234 Inhale
123412345678910111213141516123456781234
Next is upper lobe.
The MUDRA that you hold is
Adi mudra.
The count that we use is is the same count 416843 cycles.
You hope you focus your mind on the right shoulder region. Hold
adi mudra. Focus your mind on the right shoulder region. Same
count 3 cycles
Inhale 1234 Hold in
12345678910111213141516 Excel
12345678 Hold out 1234 Inhale
1234123456789101112
13141516123456781234 Inhale
123412345678910111213141516123456781234
Please open your eyes.
The next organ is
liver. Where is the liver? It is on the right side just below the
last strips. The mudra that we use is chin mudra.
No. What is account for the lungs that you have? Just did
the count for the lungs is
41684. Now you bring the last
digit to the front. What will it be?
44168. So the count for the liver is 441684 is inhalation, 4
is holding the air inside,
16 is exhalation with the sound,
8 is holding out the breath. We
will do 3 cycles. Eyes closed,
Vajrasana,
hold chin Mudra,
focus your mind on the liver on the right side just below the
last trip. The count is 44168.
We will do 3 cycles. I will
count it for you.
Inhale 1234 Hold in 1234 Exhale
12345678910111213141516 Hold out
12345678 Inhale 123412341234567
891011121314151612345678 Inhale
123412341234567891011121314151612345678
Please open your eyes
now. The next organ is stomach.
Where is the stomach? It is on the left side below the last
trip.
Now what is the count that you used for liver?
The count that we used for liver is 44168. Now you bring the last
digit to the front. What will it be?
84416? So the count for the stomach is
84416.
8 is inhalation,
4 is holding the air in,
4 is exhalation with the sound,
16 is holding out the breath. We will do 3 cycles. Vajrasana, ice
closed
chin Mudra, focus your mind on the left side, just below the
last trip for the stomach.
Inhale
12345678 Hold in 1234 Exhale
1234 Hold out
12345678910111213141516 Inhale
123456781234123412
345678910111213141516 Inhale
1234567812341234
12345678910111213141516
Please open your eyes.
The next organ is kidneys. Where are the kidneys?
It is on either side of the spine, in line with the naval at
the backside.
The mudra that uses chin mudra.
Now what is account for the stomach? We just did.
The count for the stomach was
84416.
You bring the last digit to the front, it will be 16844.
So the count for the kidneys is
1684416 is inhalation,
8 is holding the air in,
4 is acceleration with the sound, 4 is holding out the
breath. We will do 3 cycles.
Vajrasana ice closed. Hold chin mudra in your hands. Focus your
mind on either side of the spine. In line with the naval.
We will do 3 cycles
Inhale 12345678910111213141516
Holden 12345678 Exhale 1234
Holdout 1234 Inhale
1234567891011121314151612
34567812341234 Inhale
123456789101112131415161234567812341234
Open your eyes
the next organ is hurt. The mudra that we use is
Chinmaya mudra. The mudra that we use is second mudra, Chinmaya
mudra. The count that we use is
41684 is inhalation, 16 is holding. The air in
8 is exhalation with the sound.
There is no holding out the
breath. You focus your mind to the left of the chest bone. For
the heart region,
we will do 3 cycles. Please close your eyes.
Hold Chinmaya Mudra,
Focus your mind to the left of the chest bone for the heart
region.
Ice Closed
Inhale 1234 Golden
12345678910111213141516 Exhale
12345678 Inhale
1234123456789101112131415161234
567812341234567891011121314151612345678
Switch to Chin Mudra, do one
Dauti and rest.
Please open your eyes.
So hope
all of you
have followed the instructions
and then your morning check the
Chanakya. We have trusted
you in offering this online though we dont have any control
over you but still
because many of you were asking about
even in the Kriya's support we are we are seeing that many of
you were waiting for the session online. So we are saying that to
have this session
more recently from now on South that you can find turn your
practices from wherever you are and
dashakriya properly. So right now we have some time. If you
have any questions, we look at it right now.
You can post your questions in a chat box.
So Namaskaram Ajay
please review the instruction other than kriya for organs or
left side or right side of the body and how to direct prana in
that direction.
So
if you notice if you do Shakti chalana kriya properly, you are
asking the question about the variations. If you do the Shakti
Chalana Kriya properly, there is actually no need.
You know you will. You will notice where the prana is
getting directed if you do it properly, but for your
information we will repeat it.
You can direct the prana to one side of the body by holding the
mudra on that side alone. Let's say you want to direct the prana
to the
upper side of the body. So which mudra would you use if you want
to direct the plan to the upper side,
upper portion of the body? Adi
Mudra if you want to direct the
prana to the right side
in the upper upward direction,
you hold adi mudra on the right side
and you can do mudra kriya so that you will see that the prana
is getting directed. As as I
said it is not like this is a
knowledge. You have to do the kriya and experiment with it and
see you. You have to experiment with it.
Bhavna Namaskaram. Please explain Dauti again. OK, so I
will review the instructions for
Dauti once again.
How you do doubt is
you hold chin Mudra in your hands
with the tip of your tongue. You touch yellow teeth and make the
sound sh.
Making the sound, you expel the air forcefully,
Ben forward and reach your knees. By the time you reach
your knees, you must be completely empty of your breath.
Tokyo head in
so that stuck your head in and stay there for 3 to 4 seconds.
In total emptiness,
come up about 1/3 of the way,
then start the inhalation and come up.
Srikanth, please go over
Nagariya. Count once again.
Okay.
So how you do Nagariya is
you hold Chin Mudra in your hands,
You inhale in installments.
Inhaler bit.
Hold count 129.
Inhale a bit more.
Count one to 9
like this. You inhale in 8
installments
with a space off
9 counts between each installment.
At the end for the last installment,
inhale fully
count 129
release Chin Mudra in both the hands.
Close the right nostril with the right thumb
exiled to the left nostril with the sound from the pit of the
throat.
Namaskaram vasu ya question for
Pancha Sahakriya. Do we take a
break in between organs and do it as
especially transitioning from stomach, kidney inhaling for 16
is a bit tough.
So for panchayat Kriya, initially if you have
if you have started, if you are doing the kriya regularly by
now, if it is more than 6 months by now it would have fallen in
place. But still if you find it difficult to do Punchi thakeria
in a flow, it's OK to take a break in between the organs.
So when you are transitioning from one organ to another, you
directly transition. There is no an extra breath inhalation and
exhalation in between it should be a flow. But if you are
finding it difficult, if you are gasping for the breath, if you
are not able to do it continuously, it's OK to get
your breath into normal before you transition into the next
organ. So you just change the mudra and your transition into
the next organ.
Can you please explain
Swarnakala once again? Okay
namaskaram, Vinod.
So how you do Swanik raise
sitting in Vajrasana?
You place your palms on your waist,
loosely placed.
You inhale fully,
stretch your tongue out fully.
Once the tongue is stretched fully out, you do the dogs
breath.
So if a dog comes, comes running and stands here in front of you,
how it would breathe just on the surface, as rapid as it is
possible for you.
So you should not come from the abdomen. It is not like doing
kapalbhati. It should be done as rapid as it is possible for you
only on the surface.
You do this 12 to 16 times,
then close your mouth.
Inhale fully
and you engage the bandas as you do in Shambhavi. When you exhale
you make the sound from the bit of the throat.
Namaskaram karthik. How many cycles of math prakriya needs to
be done?
So today if you remember you have done 3 cycles of Madhyamik,
resent it so it is 3 cycles of math Prakriya
Saravanan, Namaskaram
in Swana, Kakariya. Should the hands be taken off the waste
before releasing the analogue, or should the log be released
first, followed by taking of the hands?
So there is no such instruction as such, but you can first
release the logs and then relax your hands.
Namaskaram Rituparn
sound in Kapalabhati is not coming perfectly. What should I
be doing wrong? Am I making the construction on the pit of the
throat as well?
So thats why we are conducting sessions like this so that you
can check your practice and correct your practice. So now
that are the instructions clear to you? Rituparn, if the
instructions for math prakriya is clear to you that you use
your diaphragm like a pump and you make the sound from the bit
of the throat. So the whatever the sound is possible for you,
you make that sound. You don't try to imitate somebody or to
to get the sound like how you have seen in the demo. It might
take some time. You can slowly work towards it, but right now
from the pit of the throat. If you don't still get the sound
from the pit of the throat, you do it with your mouth open like
this.
So first start with your mouth open like this.
If still many of you have the same question, you can please
try it along with me.
Hi
hi.
The same sound with a blow.
Same thing with the mouth closed.
Whenever you see that the sound is coming off, the bit of the
throat sound is not coming from the pit of the throat. You open
your mouth, make the sound, close your mouth and continue
doing it. So while doing Mahati
Prakriya, whenever you see the
sound is not coming properly, open your mouth, make the sound,
close your mouth and continue doing it.
Namaskaram hiral During mensuration if I get bleeding
for 6 to 7 days, can I do math prakriya after 4 days or do I
need to wait for bleeding to stop completely. So you have to
wait till it stops completely till your periods are over. Only
once your periods are over you can continue with kapalabhati.
Until then you do the variation.
That is you hold poorna mudra
and do 7 cycles or 4 to 5
duration remembering 4 points to
breathing.
Richa Sharma, Namaskaram
please can you tell the variation for periods and
travelling please. So I just repeat it for the periods.
So you instead of Kapalbhati holding Purna mudra breath with
764 to 5 to ratio 4 points to breathing 7 cycles, now I
travelling.
If you are able to sit in
Vajrasana you can always do the
full check the chanakya. As many of us, many of the volunteers,
they keep travelling but we still ensure that we do our
Kriya
on a daily basis. But on certain cases, like if you are
travelling by bus or plane for days together, where you can't
sit in Vajrasana at all.
Only in that cases you can sit on the chair.
You remove your footwear, Socks,
keep your big toes touching,
keep your back rested, head straight. You cannot do full
Shakti Chalana Kriya. You can only do naadapriya,
no doubt.
Mudra Kriya
only deep breathing No 4 to 5 to ratio
sukriya and panchayat kriya. In other words, you're not doing
any part of the Kriya which involves Kumbhaka Shunyakal
but doing the Kriya like this.
70% of the benefit may be lost.
So as much as possible just see if you are able to sit in
Vajrasana and do full check the
Chanakya
namaskaram nishanth.
What should we do instead of mark prakriya if you are not
doing math prakriya. So if you have any conditions, as I
mentioned before, any physical conditions, you avoid
kapalabhati.
Instead of kapalbhati you hold poorna mudra
and you do 7 cycles of 4 to 5 to ratio remembering 4 points to
breathing and one doubt. I just avoid kapalbhati
Namaskaram Suresh.
I underwent surgery for hernia 7
years back. Can I do math?
Prakriya, please don't.
So you do the variation that we just mentioned. Now don't do
kapalbhati
namaskaram shahrukh. Should we do bandas after every cycle of
Kapalbhati?
Do you remember did we do bandas after every cycle of Kapalbhati
today?
Yes.
So one cycle of math. Prakriya means kapalabhati and bandas
you can do 15 to 20. So here as a time constraint we will ask
you to do only 15 to 20
kapalabhati. But if you have
have been practicing it for long, so we suggest like there
should be a minimum of 50
kapalabhati per second cycle,
minimum 50 kapalbhati per cycle and you can gradually increase
the number of kapalbhati as per your comfort.
A number of kapalbhati per its saikil need not be equal. You
can do as many kapalabhati as you are comfortable with for
each cycle.
So kapalbhati and bandas means one cycle of math prakriya.
Like this you will do 3 cycles of math. Prakriya
how many kapalabhati should we do need cycle. It is just
answered.
So do we need to exhale fully within the 4 counts for kidney
because unable to excel fully within 4 counts?
What to do occur? Namaskaram Sai
Balaji so in I hope this
question is about for Pancha
Sahitya.
Yeah so the count for the punches Saikia is 16844. So in
panchayat area it is never a full acceleration or a full
inhalation. Your breathing only as per the count
okay. So you are not exhaling fully. You exhale for the count
of 4 and after that you stop it and then you go with the second
cycle.
Okay. Hope this answers your question.
So to in order to add this, some of you have mentioned that you
are not able to inhale or exhale for the count of 16. It is that
was only because right now your lung capacity is still not to
that point where you are able to exhale or inhale for the count
of 16. So if you are practicing
Shakti Chalana Kriya regularly,
you will be able to see that your lung capacity increases and
you are able to inhale or exhale for the count of 16. But for
now, if you are not able to do it
as per the account, you still keep the count.
You still keep the account and you will see that you will be
able to do it over a period of time.
Namaskaar Amiga
in Mudra kriya switching to next mudra. Is it continuous process
doing going to the next mudra?
Yes. So in Mudra Kriya,
it's a flow. It's a continuous process from one mudra to
another. You just simply transition by changing the
mudra.
Can we restart Shunya as well along with Shakti, Chalana,
Kriya? What are the 4 conditions for Shunya
Namaskaram, Amit? So in case if anybody else also have the same
question, the 4 conditions for
Shunya please focus. So the 4
conditions for union, the first
2 conditions are physical, the
next 2 conditions are mental.
So the first 2 physical conditions are
somewhat hungry, somewhat tired,
no expectations,
no reactions to the external or internal situations.
Can you please review the
Kumbhaka and Shunya for the
different prayas? Do we make the sound while inhaling as well? In
Mudra Kriya
when are the Davis.
So hope this question should have answered after doing this
kriya today. But still
so when you are inhaling you are not making the sound. OK so you
are holding only when you are exhaling and check the chanakya.
Whenever you exhale, you make the sound from the pit of the
throat. Except Sukriya.
When inhaling, you are not making the sound
so you are holding Kumbhaka and shunya ka only in Mahati,
Prakriya,
Swana and Kakariya.
In Marathi Prakriya, you engaged the bandas only on Kumbhaka
in Swana and Kakariya. You are engaging the bandas
both in Kumbhaka and Shunyakal
and doubt is you want me to review the sequence once again.
So the whole Shakti Chakra is like this. There are 5 sets
now. The Kriya Dauti
Mudra Kriya Dauti
Sukriya Mahati Prakriya Dauti
Swana Kaka Nagariya Dauti
Panchasara Takraya Date.
How can we extend the practice time? How long can we extend it
so
the duration of Shakti Chalana
Kriya can be increased
as you keep practicing it over a period of time. You will see
that once you are practicing it regularly, your lung capacity
increases
which results in your breath being slow and full.
And also if you are doing more kapalabhati
this will result in extending the duration of check the
chakria. So your lung capacity and number of Kapalbhati you are
you are doing the Shakti Chalana
Kriya might increase from
50 minutes, one hour or so and even more more to that. But if
you are doing the Kriya properly, it would take a
minimum of 40 minutes.
Should we do bandas after
Sukriya Namaskaram Kunal?
How did we do pandas today after
Sukriya?
So no bandas after Sukriya.
I remember learning math prakriya with Kumbhaka and
Shunya in 2006 and Swan and
Kakariya did not have kumbhaka
that time. Should I follow the new instruction or old steps?
Okay so thats why the online sessions for you. So today
session is for you. So whatever the instructions that has been
told today, please follow that instructions.
This is for NEELE. I am sorry.
OK Namaskaram Nile.
During poorna mudra do we need to touch all fingers
entering point or just touching ring finger is fine. I am not
able to touch first finger at the ring point. So when you hold
purna mudra the priority is like your ring finger should touch
each other. So when the ring finger touch each other, the
rest of the fingers should automatically fall in place.
But at some instance there is a tendency for a pointing finger
to come out. That's OK, but
it should be the fists.
The ring finger should touch each other and rest of the
fingers. You make an effort so that they touch each other.
Haka please explain. Punch sahakriya for lungs.
So lungs have 3 loops so we do puja sahitya for lungs for 3
loops. Free loops means lower lobe,
middle lobe and upper lobe,
lower lobe of the lungs. You use chin mudra.
Count is
416843 cycles. Middle lobe,
Chinmaya, Mudra.
Same count 3 cycles,
Upper lobe are the mudra,
same count 3 cycles. So for middle loop you focus your
breath, you focus your mind
whether it cage ends and the diaphragm begins.
For the middle lobe you focus it in the chest region. For lower
lobe it is in the diaphragm where the package and the
diaphragm begins. With the middle lobe, it is in the chest
region.
For the upper lobe, you focus your mind on the right shoulder
region.
Namaskaram tejal pregnancy variations. Yes we will go over
the practice during pregnancy.
So during pregnancy you can do
check the chanakya. With a little modifications you can do
naadapriya. Do not attempt Dauti at any point of time.
You can do Mudra Kriya.
You can hold Kumbhakaran Shunya.
That is you can hold 4 to 5 to
ratio
only in the beginning stages till you are comfortable with.
After sometime if you are not comfortable holding Kumbhaka and
Suniaga, you do not hold
Kumbhakarna. Shunya you only do
deep breathing that is deep inhalations and deep
exhalations. Then Sukriya you can do
Mahathi Prakriya please do not do kapalbhati again hold poorna
mudra and do 7 cycles of 4 to 5
to ratio remembering 4 points to
breathing. Even here you hold 4
to 5 to ratio only until you are
comfortable with holding 4 to 5
duration after sometime then if
you are not comfortable holding
Kumbha, Gandhinagar again just
do
deep breathing, deep Inhalations and Deep exhalations.
Swana Kakar, Nagariya
only until the beginning of 7th month. Kakariya must be done
gently, not forcefully.
You can do puncher Sahakriya
Akka. I will be doing this after
10 years. I was doing Shambhavi
but left check the chanakya can continue after today Namaskaram
Mahesh. So if you have gone through the instructions, if the
Kriya is clear to you, you can please continue doing check the
chanakya from now on.
Will Shunya initiation get faded away if I haven't done it since
2 years?
Namaskaram Vikrant.
Why you haven't done since 2
years
is the question that you have to ask for yourself. So in case if
you want to review, if you want to get clarified,
just come for Shunya volunteering first, then you can
speak to the teacher. But see that once you get initiated into
Shunya, please see how to keep it on.
Because this is a lifetime opportunity, once in a lifetime
opportunity. So please dont miss it.
Namaskaram preeti. Can you please go through the seating
position for Shunya?
So when you sit for Shunya,
you can either sit in a cross legged posture, comfortable
cross legged posture
or you can sit with your legs stretched
and you can cross your ankles right over the left.
Always the bag should be rested, head straight.
OK, I repeat.
So you can either sit in a comfortable cross leg at
posture, or you can sit in a sit with your legs stretched,
ankles crossed, right over the left back, rested, hit straight.
Your right palm should be placed over your left palm.
This is a sitting postures for
Shunya
Namaskaram Maheshwara Sai.
Can people with epilepsy do
SK? Are there any modification
you can do Shakti Chalana,
Kriya. So as we mentioned you
can still check the Chanakya
Namaskaar Ramakka. I want to know right order of Guru Pooja
Shambhavi, shakti Chalana kriya and Surya Kriya and Shunya
Namaskaram sandhya. So you start with
Guru Puja
then hot yoga practices that is
Surekha or Surya Shakti. Then
Shakti, Chalana, Kriya and
Shambhavi. I repeat Guru Puja
Surya Kriya or Surya Shakti
Shakti Chalana Kriya and
Shambhavi
Namaskaram zero
about the 4 to 5 to breath.
Should we commit to breathe
slowly and fully first or the ratio first? If I inhale as
slowly as fully as I can, then exhale as 5 will be some
difficult.
So in Mudra Kriya,
it's always your full and slow breaths, but it is your natural
breath. Do not go beyond your capacity. Do not go beyond what
you what you can inhale or exhale for. It should be full
and slow, but it should still be your natural breaths. So
ideally, if you see your exhalations are anyway a little
longer than your inhalations, if you simply sit here and breathe
with your eyes closed, you will see that your exhalations are
naturally longer than your inhalations.
So there is no such thing like it will be difficult. Just see
that you are not inhaling or exhaling beyond what you can do.
It should be a natural breath
Namaskaram aka gap between 2
Shunya. Can I do 3 Shunya day
Namaskaram Bhaskar. So please stick to to Shunya side.
And the gap between 2 sonias is
3 and half to 4 hours. And the
conditions are important.
Maintaining the 4 hours gap,
maintaining the conditions, do shunya 2 times a day.
Okay,
so,
so once again we will review the
Shakti Chalana. Kriya will
review the sequence once again.
So you start with
Naadapriya. Naadapriya means
chin mudra sound are 3 times,
Chinmaya mudra
Sono 3 times.
Adi mudra
sound ma with mouth close 3
times
then chin mudra David Evans
the next kriya you will be doing is Mudra kriya.
In Mudra Kriya you will remember
4 points to breathing and 4 to 5
to ratio.
What are the 4 points to breathing?
Breathe fully, fully in, fully out. Breathe slowly, slowly and
slowly out.
No jerks
make the sound during exhalation
in each and every breath. You remember 4 points to breathing
and 4 to 5 to ratio.
So you will be doing Mudra kriya using 4 mudras, chin mudra,
Chinmaya Mudra
Adi mudra
merudand mudra.
You will be doing 7 cycles for each of the 4 mudras.
One cycle means you breathe once, remembering 4 points to
breathing 4 to 5 to ratio. That is one cycle, so 7 cycles 4
Mudras.
Then hold Chin Mudra Dauti.
After that you do sukriya
How long you do sukriya
Sukriya Ishwar
3 to 4 minutes.
So if there are people who have the blocked nostrils, you come
out of Vajrasana properly, do the jogging or the variation,
then sit back in Vajrasana and do sukriya for 3 to 4 minutes.
After 4 minutes check if the breath is balanced. If it is not
balanced, you continue Sukriya for 2 more minutes.
The next kriya is Mahatma
Prakriya.
So we will do 3 cycles of maths prakriya. One cycle of math
Prakriya means holding purna mudra kapalabhati and engage the
bandas on fullness. This is one cycle of Mark Prakriya.
You will be doing 3 cycles of
Mad Prakriya
Chin Mudra Dauti if there are people who should not attempt
made prakriya
holding Purna mudra. You do 7
cycles of 4 to 5 curatio
remembering 4 points to breathing one day outing.
The next set of Kriya's is
Swapna, Kakkar and Nagariya.
So Swapnapriya,
how hero Sanakya
palms on your waist, loosely placed. Inhale fully
switch the tongue out.
Do the dogs breath 12 to 16
times?
Close your mouth in Helpfully
engage the bandas both on like in Shambhavi. Engage the bandas
both in Kumbhaka and Shunya like in Shambhavi.
Next is Kakariya, same as Vakya
palm son your waste in helpfully switch the tongue out Dokriya 12
to 16 times. Close your mouth.
Inhale fully engaged the Bandas
Asian Shambhavi.
Next is Nagariya. Nagariya means
you hold Chin Mudra in your hands.
Inhale in installments
of 86 or 4,
with a space of 9 counts between each installment. At the end for
the last installment, inhale fully
count 129
Release Chin Mudra and both the hands
close right Nostril excel to the left Nostril
after Nagariya Dauki.
The last set of Kriya video is
Puncher Sahit Thakuria.
Or you can remember it as 5
organs. What are the 5 organs?
Lungs, Liver,
Stomach,
ginnis, heart, Lungs have 3
loops. Lower loop mudra is chin
mudra.
Count is 416843 cycles for inhalation
16 holding the air in
8 exhalation with the sound
4 holding out the breath.
For the middle loop Chinmaya mudra same count 416843 cycles.
Upper lobe adi mudra same count
3 cycles.
The next organ is lever on the right side mudra that you uses.
Chin Mudra
count is 44168
3 cycles.
The next organ is
stomach on the left side.
The mudra that uses chin mudra
count is
844163 cycles.
The next organ is kidneys.
The mudra that you use is chin mudra.
Hickins are on the other side of the spine, in line with the
table.
The count is
168443 cycles. The next organ is
Hart. The mudra that you use is
Chinmaya mudra.
The count is 4168
3 cycles then you end with Chin
Mudra Thuthi.
Umm, hope this session was useful to you.
Hope you make the best use of the program for this 3 hours, so
there are a few announcements.
The next Q&A session is on
14th April
and May. Also, we have a calendar session which will be
announced later, but one announced is 14th April and the
next review session where we will do the practice together is
in June.
There will be a feedback form sent to your email. Please fill
the form
and
we will see you back soon in the next session. Right now will
close with the invocation.
Please close your eyes.
Hussar to Tomasz
Kamaya
Dharma. Solmaz Chote Kamal
Dear
Mrityu, Your Mama. Amrutanjan,
Maya
Shanti, Shanti Shanti.
Hello.
Hello.
Hi.
Hello.
Hello.